Welcome back to Gary's Economics.
Today we're going to talk about interest rates and house prices.
So I want to talk about a very interesting thing
that's happened in the last year or two,
which is that
interest rates have risen
very aggressively
all over the world, including here in the UK.
And everybody has been expecting
that that is going to cause a big fall in house prices,
which hasn't really happened.
So today we're going to explain
why that is and talk about what it means for you
and what's going to happen from here.
And we're going to end up with a nice, sort of,
concept that I use to understand more broadly
what's happening in the economy,
which I used for a long time.
So I want to start by basically going
through the story
of house prices since the beginning of COVID,
because that is when big dramatic change
started to happening.
So at the beginning of COVID,
there was a ton of predictions
that house prices would collapse.
And at the same time,
I wrote my first article in March 2020
and we made our first video on this channel in June 2020.
I predicted we would see a very aggressive
increase in house prices, which we did
so from the beginning of COVID until sort of
the end of 2021
There was a super aggressive
increase in house prices all over the place.
So that first question is why
did everybody make such bad predictions
about house prices in the early COVID?
I think this is based on a very simple logic,
which I think a lot of people
have kind of built into their brain,
which is that when the economy is bad,
house prices fall and stock prices fall.
And lots of people believe this.
I think this is
it's almost kind of
how we're trained to understand the weak
economy is a collapse in the stock
market, fall in house prices.
a common logic. It's widely believed.
It's totally incorrect.
I think the most
obvious example of that is if you go back and look at 2008.
2008 is an interesting example
because of the initial onset of the 2008 crisis,
we saw really massive fall in stock prices
and in a lot of the world
we saw pretty dramatic falls in house prices as well.
But if you look at the long term picture of 2008.
2008 was actually the start of
an enormous house price boom and an enormous
stock price boom. So immediately there were sharp falls.
But over the next sort of 10, 12 years,
we saw truly enormous house price rises
here in the UK, in the US, basically all over the world. So
what you have here is a good example of a case
where the economy was actually phenomenally weak
for the sort of 10 years after 2008.
And yet what we actually had was really aggressive
increases in house prices, really
aggressive increases in stock prices.
So this is the first challenge to this commonly held idea
that when the economy is weak, house prices go down.
If you look at 2008,
what we actually have
is a situation where the economy was
phenomenally weak
and it caused an enormous boom in house prices.
But despite that happening after 2008,
this idea still exists in the popular consciousness,
and it exists in the minds of
economists, people who write
articles in the media about economics
that when the economy is weak, house prices fall.
And I really clearly remember at the beginning of COVID,
when I wrote for The Guardian
saying house prices are going to go up.
At the same time, Larry Elliott, the chief
economics correspondent of The Guardian,
wrote an article, and we’ll link it in the description
so you can see, saying house
prices are going to collapse later this year.
So why was it that I was then able
to make this correct prediction
when basically everybody else was predicting
that house price crash didn't happen?
The reason for that is essentially
because my background as a trader
and as a economist is an inequality economist.
So at the very beginning of COVID,
it was very clear
that governments were going to give a ton of money out.
And I cannot emphasise
how enormous the amounts of money
given out by the UK government,
The US government, governments
all over the world were during COVID,
and this was already pretty obvious very early in COVID.
So of March/April 2020,
we knew there's going to be a long lockdown.
Governments are going to give an absolute ton of money out.
So for me,
I think most traditional economists are like,
they’re giving money out because the economy is weak.
Weak economy, house prices are down.
But for me,
as an inequality economist, I wanted to know
who is going to end up with that money.
If you are focusing on distribution,
that's the question you want to ask.
So we know the government's
going to give out huge amounts of money.
We know somebody is going to accumulate
huge amounts of money.
Who is it going to be?
And what that meant was,
I was able to realise
what was then and I think still is now,
the most important and underappreciated
consequence of COVID,
which was this enormous
amount of money given out by
the UK government,
also the US government, global governments
will be accumulated by someone.
It will be accumulated largely by richer people.
And what that means is
COVID will lead to a situation where
rich individuals and rich families
have got absolutely enormous amounts of money.
And I think that was the big thing
which was missed by economists
and still is being missed by economists.
And if you understand
that one of the consequences, in my opinion,
probably the most important consequence
economically of COVID
is that rich people will accumulate
enormous amounts of money.
I genuinely meaning, enormous amounts of money.
We're talking about your average rich individual
accumulate 100, 200, £300,000.
You know,
the average billionaire increased their wealth by,
I think, something like £720 million
in the first year of COVID. Right.
So enormous accumulation of wealth by the rich.
If you know that's going to happen.
It's just totally
insane to predict anything other
than a massive increase in house prices
because what the rich people do with their money,
they buy assets,
they lend it out to people who want to take out mortgages,
they essentially then drive house prices up.
If rich people get their money,
house prices will go up, stock prices will go up.
I made these predictions and that's what happened.
But then a really interesting thing started to happen,
which was about two years ago.
Interest rates started to rise.
In this country from effectively 0% to just above 5%.
Similar in the US, similar issue in Europe.
They didn't reach quite the same high levels.
And that changed the dynamic basically.
So that moved us into this new situation, which is
economists and traders
have this very strong belief
that when interest rates go up,
asset prices and house prices should fall.
And that is for a very understandable reason,
which is in the case of house prices,
if people can't get a mortgage,
if interest rates are super high
and lots of people, lots of you have witnessed that,
that it's much more difficult to get a mortgage
when interest rates go up.
And also on the flipside.
Rich people can now get 5% interest on their cash.
So maybe they're not going to buy houses.
They'll just keep the cash
and they'll get their 5% interest rate
and will be happy with that.
And everybody started to predict,
you know, in many cases, the same thing people
who predicted a house price crash
at the beginning of COVID,
came back and said, okay, well, now
we're definitely going to get house price crash
now because not only have
we got this terrible economy,
but we've also got very high interest rates.
But what actually happened was that,
you know, basically house prices,
they sort of stumbled a little bit.
But I think the broad picture of house
prices, it depends where you look is they rose
super quickly sort of 30% or so in 2 years.
And then since then they've kind of
maybe stumbled down 5/6%.
And it was during this rapid rise
in interest rates that I gave my interview
with Aaron Bastani on Novara Media,
which you can find on YouTube.
That was when interest rates
had just started to rise really quickly
and then everybody was saying
house prices are definitely going to fall.
And I came out and said, no,
I think the house prices will actually,
in the long run, continue to rise.
And
I think
I've kind of been borne out again
here, that this crash hasn't happened.
But the house price growth has definitely slowed.
And I think we could already sort of see
when when I said that 18 months ago
that that house prices were basically stopping,
they were not going up any longer.
So
now everybody is saying and have been saying
for the last couple of years,
especially in the last 6 months, 12 months,
why on earth
have house prices not fallen
despite these massive rises in interest rates?
And people have been saying
the same thing about stock prices.
If stock prices go up
very aggressively, all the classic economics says
stock prices should fall.
But I checked the stock markets yesterday,
before I filmed this video, we’re
filming this in the middle of December.
Yesterday, French stock market hit a new all time high.
German stock market a new all time high.
US stock market is just below the all time high,
which it hit basically before the rates went up.
And this is the same in most of the world.
Most global stock
markets are at or through all time historic highs.
And I think this is,
first of all
something worth realising
because I don't think people are aware
that in the space we
are in now, in the economy
where living standards are collapsing,
there's a sort of broad consensus for an economic crisis.
I would think you can justify the economic disaster,
that the vast majority of global stock
markets are at or through their all time highs.
So that's the first thing, which I think is
first is worth internalising.
And the second thing is
why has again everybody been so wrong?
Why is it that despite these massive increases
in interest rates,
we haven't seen these house price falls,
we haven't seen the stock market falls?
And me personally, I'm not surprised by what's happened.
If you go back
and look at my predictions at the beginning of COVID,
I said we would have massive increases in inflation
and we would have increases in interest rates.
So my predictions that
house prices would rise and stock
prices would rise, which they have
was factoring in an acceptance
of the fact that inflation and interest rates would rise.
And the reason I was able to do that
is because I understood
this basic driver
once again is the big thing everyone is missing,
which is that rich people have accumulated
an unbelievably enormous amount of money.
I think increasingly the big driving factor behind
economic incorrectness.
I think as a trader, you always want to work out
what is the big thing that's being missed?
And the big thing that has been missed
since the beginning of COVID
and still is being missed now,
is that the rich accumulated
an unbelievably enormous amount of money.
If you understand that,
then everything that has happened
from the beginning of COVID
since the rise in interest rates makes total sense, right?
If the rich accumulate a ton of money,
asset prices will rise, but also inflation will rise.
They will start buying more stuff.
You know,
they will increase their consumption of rental housing.
They will buy more houses, they will rent bigger houses.
That with push rents up, they'll push prices up
and then they'll push inflation up
and that will probably push interest rates up.
But if the reason that interest rates have gone up
is because rich people have an enormous amount of money.
Then of course
prices are not going to fall
because the driving force here,
the first impetus, the first push
is a massive accumulation of cash of richer people.
So I think everything is really consistent with that.
If you understand the first move
in this economic crisis
as being an enormous accumulation of cash
by wealthy people,
then you would expect
exactly what we have seen, which is
pretty much exactly what I've been predicting throughout,
which is massive inflation,
big increase in asset prices,
big increase in interest rates,
but asset prices don't fall.
That's basically what I've been saying.
But what is interesting now
is I think we're moving into the next stage of this,
which is which is what I've been calling for a long time,
which is
if, in my opinion,
the inflation is caused
by this massive
transition of cash,
gift of cash essentially from the governments to the rich,
then you would expect that inflation
to be a kind of one off and then stop.
Because that gift was a massive one off gift.
And then it didn't stop, essentially,
but it left without a lot.
Which means that the inflation happens once
and then basically goes away
and that is,
you know, what I predicted in my predictions
a year ago, a year and a half ago
and is basically what we’re seeing.
Inflation is collapsing all across the world.
It is still above the 2% target in most countries,
including here in the UK at the moment.
But the direction seems to be aggressively down. And now
economists are starting to predict
that central banks will all start cutting.
And I put a few bets on early this year that...
At that
time, early this year,
markets were saying that UK
interest rates would reach nearly 6%.
Whereas in the middle of next year, 2024,
this might be 2024 when this goes out actually,
so in the middle of 2024
Interest rates were expected
to reach nearly 6% here in the UK.
Now they're expected to be only just above 4%.
And I think that even that,
to be honest, that prediction might be too high.
I think rates might end up going down even lower than that.
And the reason for that is
at the same time
as the rich have accumulated a ton of money,
and this would be very visible and obvious
to anybody watching from an ordinary background,
the financial situation of ordinary families
is being extremely tightly squeezed.
And it is ultimately ordinary families
that drive the economy.
And rich families tend to buy assets. So
as ordinary families get poorer, inflation
will will start to fall.
Now, once those interest rates come down,
what those interest rates did,
and we can all see, that is they
temporarily stopped that aggressive rise in asset prices.
So once we know that rich people have a ton of money,
asset prices should go through the roof
because the amount of money that accumulated in COVID
was truly enormous.
But the interest rates do two things.
One, they make rich people happy to sit on the cash,
taking interest rate...
taking interest from the government,
because they’re making a 5% interest on it.
And two,
it prevents them from doing mortgage lending
because if you go to the bank,
you can't get a mortgage
because interest rates are too high.
They can’t actually lend the money out.
Once those rates come down, those two factors will end.
Rich people will stop being content
to sit on this enormous pile of cash.
They'll go back to buying assets again.
And they will start,
they will start doing more mortgage
lending again, which will drive asset
prices and house prices up.
So I think
we're moving into the next stage of this now,
which is another really, really aggressive
asset price inflation, including house prices, of course.
So I wanted to talk a little bit about this concept of
once rates come down,
the rich will start using this enormous pile of money again
to buy assets.
Because I think there is this
concept that exists and I hear economists
on the news suggest this kind of idea a lot,
which is that, okay, savings are very high right now.
The rich have a load of savings.
They need to spend it down, and they'll spend the savings
and the savings will go away
and they'll stop having their effect.
And I think this is, this is just not how money works.
If I have a ton of savings and I
buy your house,
I don't have the savings anymore.
But you do have the savings. Money doesn't work like that.
Once the government gives a ton of money
out, as it has done,
somebody has to hold onto that money
until the government taxes it back.
Money doesn't disappear.
You cannot simply disappear your money.
You can only give it to somebody else.
So what this means is
the idea
that this massive accumulation of savings by the rich
is going to have a one off temporary effect,
is just basically wrong.
This will have a massive driving effect
for a long period of time.
Because the rich are going to go around
trying to buy all of the assets.
But who owns most of the assets?
It's the rich.
So when the rich try to buy assets,
all they do is they buy the assets from one another,
they drive the asset prices up.
And the money,
this enormous amount of savings simply circulates
between the rich people and they’re effectively
unable to, unsuccessful at, getting rid of their savings.
They simply cannot get rid of their savings.
It is impossible
because they're buying assets from each other.
So how do rich people actually get rid of their savings?
Well, the only way rich people can get
rid of these enormous savings which they’ve accumulate
from the government is to buy assets from somebody
who is not rich.
But what groups are there in
society of people who are not rich, who own assets?
There's basically only,
the sort of, property only middle class,
and there are still a lot of non
rich people who own property in this country.
And the other obvious example is the government.
So it creates this massive drive for the rich to buy assets
from the middle class, to buy assets from government.
The other thing they can do
is they can lend that money to the middle class.
For example,
mortgage lending to the government, for example,
the government would need a lot more money
to support the rapid increasing poverty in the country.
But in both cases they get the money back.
If I lend you money for a mortgage and you buy a house
from a rich person,
I get the money back when you buy the house.
If I lend the money to government,
they use it to pay your rent, I get the money
when you pay your rent.
So
this money creates a force, it's
kind of a vacuum in a sense,
to suck the wealth away
from middle class, away from the government,
to drive the middle class into debt,
to drive the government into debt.
And that is the only possible way
that the rich can get rid of this
enormous accumulated money.
So I think that is basically the state of play.
That is where we are.
I think we're moving into a really interesting
next phase of this, which I want to talk about a bit,
which is rates. Inflation will come down.
It's already come down a lot. Thanks Rishi Sunak.
He did it apparently. in every country in the world.
Interest rates will come down
and asset prices and house prices will increase enormously
and that will happen
essentially to the rich buying assets from each other,
but also aggressively buying the assets
of the middle class,
bankrupting the middle class, buying assets
from the government, bankrupting the government.
And we've really seeing that.
We're seeing decreased
financial positions of the middle
class, decreased financial decisions
of the government,
and massively increased financial positions of the rich.
And I think
underneath this,
I wanted to bring you quickly something
which I will probably talk more about, the future videos.
There's a general concept here
which I think is useful to understand,
which is something that I wrote about
when I was at university and something I think about a lot.
Which is that
when inequality increases,
and it has increased really rapidly,
especially in the last few years,
it changes the shape of the economy.
It means that rich people have more wealth
and ordinary people and governments have less wealth.
And what that means is society
as a whole starts to demand
less goods and services and demand more assets.
And that is because ordinary
people spend the vast
majority of their income in their lives
and rich people save,
which means essentially used to buy assets
the vast majority of their income.
So as inequality increases,
ordinary people’s
spending power goes down,
rich people’s spending power goes up,
which means society as a whole says
we don't want goods and services anymore. We want assets.
Well, who is that good for?
People with assets, the rich.
Who is that bad for?
People who produce goods and services,
which is working people. So it creates this
kind of centripetal force in society.
If the rich are richer, it benefits the rich
because they want the things which the rich have.
But it also means you get this interesting
disconnect between two kinds of inflation.
And I probably would talk about this more in other videos.
But when you see inflation spoken about on the news,
they are normally talking about things
like CPI, consumer price inflation, which is inflation
in goods and services.
It doesn't look at inflation in things like asset prices,
but when economies are becoming rapidly more unequal,
they don't really want goods and services
because ordinary people are becoming poorer.
What they want is assets, because rich people
obviously richer.
So you get a natural deflation in goods and services prices
and it invests in assets.
But we don't look at the asset inflation.
Central banks
when they consider what interest rate to do, the news
when talking about inflation,
they only look at goods and services inflation.
So we will move into a situation where
goods and services inflation,
and in particular wage
inflation is very, very low, maybe even negative,
which means central banks cut rates.
Which I think they both are doing relatively quickly.
And then you get this like double whammy impact
on asset prices, which is first of all,
the rich are making a ton of money,
so assets want to go up.
Secondly, interest rates are collapsing,
so assets go up even more.
So you get this kind of disconnect.
Which is, the ordinary economy is sh*t basically,
there's not a lot of inflation.
And I think we will move into this world soon.
So interest rates come down,
whereas asset prices are going massively through the roof.
And that's what we saw after 2008.
And I think that's what we're going to move into
in the next year
or two here in the UK and in the rest of the world.
And I think we need to have a think about what that means
for our society, because
if you haven't watched it,
I recommend watch the video on this channel
called the Asset Economy, because
I talk a lot in that video
about what it means for us as a society
and the different groups of people in society
If asset prices and house prices go up aggressively,
which I think they will do shortly.
But I think the most interesting thing about is,
in my opinion, increasing asset prices
and increasing house prices will be bad for 90% of society.
And I think
some people might be surprised to hear that
because I think a lot of families
that own their own property
and a big chunk of families in this country still do own
their own property, will feel like they're winning
when house prices go up.
But the truth of the matter is the only way
to actually benefit personally
from rising house prices is to sell your home, basically.
And,
you know, as more and more young people are seeing,
it's becoming increasingly impossible to buy a home
if you don't have money from your parents.
Which means that
if the older generation sells their home
to benefit from the increased asset prices,
then their younger generations, their kids
and grandkids will basically become homeless
and will basically be stuck in poverty essentially forever.
So I think we need to think a lot
about what it's going to mean for our society
when house prices go up even more.
I think it will impoverish,
you know, 80/90% of our society.
But I think it will also be hugely politically divisive
because there will be a lot of families that own property
that will feel like it's a good thing for them
that want to support it,
despite the fact that it's long run
impoverishing their family.
So I think we need to prepare for this basically.
We need to understand ourselves
that rising house prices
is part of a mechanism
which is impoverishing ordinary families.
We need to understand that, we need to share that,
especially with people perhaps in the older
generation who own property who think it’s good.
We need to be able to explain to them and to other people
how these rising property prices
are going to really impoverish future generations.
So my end message on this is,
things are going to change relatively quickly.
We're going to move into a complicated space where
the economy stays terrible.
And I think it will get worse.
Living standards stay terrible, and I think they will get worse.
But asset prices and house prices will start to increase.
And that could be very divisive in our societies.
What you need to understand,
what you need to convince your parents
and grandparents to understand if you can't,
is that this is not society getting richer,
this is society getting poorer.
Living standards for the masses
all getting worse and will continue to get worse.
That is a consequence
of the massively increasing inequality
and massively increasing wealth
of the rich in our societies.
The only way to stop that
is to tax rich people more aggressively
so that ordinary people
can have a fairer
share of what we're producing in our societies.
We can do that, if we tax the rich,
we can make life better.
I'm going to be pushing that on this channel.
So please
share this video with your friends
and family, support us and help us stop things
from being a disaster. Thank you very much.